docs: add 1.13 upgrade considerations (#14259)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/upgrading/upgrade-specific.mdx

### Service Mesh Compatibility

Existing Consul deployments using service mesh

> (i.e., containing any registered Connect proxies)

Author: What I'm trying to convey is that there's no such thing as a Consul service mesh that _doesn't_ contain registered Connect proxies.

... I think I have an idea on how to do this better/differently... I'll try it out.

> (i.e., containing any registered Connect proxies)

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/85913323/185486458-9cb18653-8bd7-4593-b15d-f8fbc57e915a.png)

must consider the following before upgrading to Consul 1.13.x

> depending on their configuration.

Author: Thanks - I'll try to improve.

The three subsections below are meant to describe the three conditions. Maybe I can just enumerate the subsections in a list (as a summary), since those are the three configurations that need to be considered.

> #### For all service mesh deployments

Author: ```suggestion
#### All service mesh deployments
```

> Upgrade to **at least Consul 1.13.1**.

Author: I agree that "at least" is a little awkward (there's no mention of version). I do think there's value in keeping this sentence as concise as possible.

How about this?

> Upgrade to **Consul version 1.13.1 or later**.

This bug is fixed in Consul versions 1.13.1 and newer.

#### If using auto-encrypt or auto-config

**Do not upgrade to Consul 1.13 yet** if using
[auto-encrypt](/docs/agent/config/config-files#auto_encrypt) or
[auto-config](/docs/agent/config/config-files#auto_config).

> In Consul 1.13, auto-encrypt and auto-config both cause Consul
> to require gRPC communication with Envoy proxies to now use TLS,
> but the Envoy proxies are unlikely to be configured to use gRPC.
> This will cause Envoy proxies (sidecars, gateways) to disconnect
> from the control plane (Consul agents).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Consul 1.13, auto-encrypt and auto-config both cause Consul
to require TLS for gRPC communication with Envoy proxies. However,
since the Envoy proxies are unlikely to be configured to use gRPC,
this will cause Envoy proxies (sidecars, gateways) to disconnect
from the control plane (Consul agents).
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Consul 1.13, auto-encrypt and auto-config both cause Consul
to require gRPC communication with Envoy proxies to now use TLS.
In environments where the Envoy proxies are not configured to use TLS,
this will cause Envoy proxies (sidecars, gateways) to disconnect
from the control plane (Consul agents) after Consul is upgraded to 1.13.
```

Envoy proxies always use gRPC when communicating to the control plane. This clarifies the situation where a proxy may be disconnected from the control plane.

Author: Good catch. I meant that when auto-encrypt and auto-config are in use, I had thought from conversations with engineering that Envoy proxies were unlikely to already be configured to use gRPC **with TLS**. (I accidentally omitted "with TLS" in the original text.)

Author: @blake: Should we use stronger language than "in environments where ..." if we think Envoy proxies aren't likely to be configured to use gRPC with TLS in this case? (If you suspect that may not be true, "in environments where" is a good substitute)

Reviewer 2: It depends on how operators have configured Consul and their proxies.

Consul-K8s configures sidecars proxies, ingress, and terminating gateways to connect to the gRPC port over TLS when TLS is enabled in the Helm chart.

The same is not automatically configured for Nomad and VM-based environments. The operator would be required to configure TLS and the appropriate env vars to instruct the proxy to use TLS. If they have not enabled TLS, they will be affected by this bug during upgrade.

The underlying cause is the same as discussed in
[gRPC TLS changes](#if-https-port-not-enabled-on-consul-agents-grpc-tls-changes).
However, when using auto-encrypt or auto-config,
the problem **cannot** currently be avoided by 
[modifying the agent's TLS configuration](#modify-the-consul-agent-s-tls-configuration)
because [`tls.defaults`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_defaults)

> is automatically set.

Reviewer 3: This isn't _entirely_ accurate, it's actually that we consider the auto-config/auto-encrypt cert alongside `tls.defaults` and `tls.grpc`, but it's the same outcome.

Author: Gotcha. So they don't set `tls.defaults`, but they are another source that TLS material is inherited from across all interfaces (just like `tls.defaults`)?

Reviewer 3: Yep exactly. Sorry for the confusion, I definitely said or implied they set `tls.defaults` on Zoom yesterday!

We are working to address this problem in an upcoming 1.13 patch release.

#### If HTTPS port not enabled on Consul agents (gRPC TLS changes) ((#grpc-tls))

If the HTTPS port is not enabled
([`ports { https = POSITIVE_INTEGER }`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#https_port))
on a pre-1.13 Consul agent,
**[modify the agent's TLS configuration before upgrading](#modify-the-consul-agent-s-tls-configuration)**
to avoid Envoy proxies (sidecars, gateways)
disconnecting from the control plane (Consul agents).

##### Changes to gRPC and HTTP interface configuration

> A Consul agent's HTTP API may be exposed externally,
> so enabling HTTPS (TLS encryption for HTTP) is important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a Consul agent's HTTP API is exposed externally,
enabling HTTPS (TLS encryption for HTTP) is important.
```

The gRPC interface is used for xDS communication between Consul and
Envoy proxies (sidecars, gateways) when using Consul service mesh.
A Consul agent's gRPC traffic is often loopback-only,
for which TLS encryption is not important.

> Prior to Consul 1.13, TLS configuration for a Consul agent's
> HTTP and gRPC interfaces was coupled:
> if [`ports { https = POSITIVE_INTEGER }`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#https_port)
> was configured, TLS was enabled for both HTTP *and* gRPC.
> This coupling was inconvenient for deployments that
> needed TLS for HTTP, but not for gRPC:
> enabling HTTPS also required launching Envoy proxies
> with the necessary TLS key material for xDS communication
> with its Consul agent via TLS over gRPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prior to Consul 1.13, if [`ports { https = POSITIVE_INTEGER }`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#https_port)
was configured, TLS was enabled for both HTTP *and* gRPC.
This was inconvenient for deployments that
needed TLS for HTTP, but not for gRPC.
Enabling HTTPS also required launching Envoy proxies
with the necessary TLS key material for xDS communication
with its Consul agent via TLS over gRPC.
```

> Consul 1.13 addresses this inconvenience by making possible the
> full decoupling of the TLS configuration
> for HTTP and gRPC interfaces.
> TLS for gRPC is no longer enabled by setting
> [`ports { https = POSITIVE_INTEGER }`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#https_port).
> TLS configuration for gRPC is now determined exclusively by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consul 1.13 addresses this inconvenience by decoupling the TLS configuration for HTTP and gRPC interfaces.
TLS for gRPC is no longer enabled by setting
[`ports { https = POSITIVE_INTEGER }`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#https_port).
TLS configuration for gRPC is now determined exclusively by:
```

1. [`tls.grpc`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_grpc), which overrides
2. [`tls.defaults`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_defaults), which overrides
3. [Deprecated TLS options](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_deprecated_options) such as
   [`ca_file`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#ca_file-4),
   [`cert_file`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#cert_file-4), and
   [`key_file`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#key_file-4).

> This decoupling has a side effect that necessitates a
> [TLS configuration change](#modify-the-consul-agent-s-tls-configuration)
> for pre-1.13 agents without the HTTPS port enabled.
> Without a TLS configuration change,
> Consul 1.13 agents may now expect gRPC *with* TLS,
> causing communication to fail with Envoy proxies (sidecars, gateways)
> that continue to use gRPC *without* TLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This decoupling has a side effect that requires a
[TLS configuration change](#modify-the-consul-agent-s-tls-configuration)
for pre-1.13 agents without the HTTPS port enabled.
Without a TLS configuration change,
Consul 1.13 agents may now expect gRPC *with* TLS,
causing communication to fail with Envoy proxies (sidecars, gateways)
that continue to use gRPC *without* TLS.
```

##### Modify the Consul agent's TLS configuration

If [`tls.grpc`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_grpc),
[`tls.defaults`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_defaults),
or the [deprecated TLS options](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_deprecated_options)

> define TLS material (`ca_file`, `ca_path`, `cert_file`, `key_file`),

Author: @boxofrad : is this a complete list?

> define TLS material (`ca_file`, `ca_path`, `cert_file`, `key_file`),

Reviewer 3: Looks complete to me!

To avoid this problem, make the following agent configuration changes:

1. Remove TLS material from the Consul agents'
   interface-generic TLS configuration options:
   [`tls.defaults`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_grpc) and
   [deprecated TLS options](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_deprecated_options)
2. Reapply TLS material to the non-gRPC interfaces that need it with the
   interface-specific TLS configuration stanzas
   [introduced in Consul 1.12](/docs/upgrading/upgrade-specific#tls-configuration):
   [`tls.https`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_https) and
   [`tls.internal_rpc`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#tls_internal_rpc).

   If upgrading directly from pre-1.12 Consul,
   the above configuration change cannot be made before upgrading.
   Therefore, consider upgrading agents to Consul 1.12 before upgrading to 1.13.

If pre-1.13 Consul agents have set
[`ports { https = POSITIVE_INTEGER }`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#https_port),
this configuration change is not required to upgrade.
That setting means the Consul agent requires TLS for gRPC *already*,
and will continue to do so after upgrading to 1.13.

> If your pre-1.13 service mesh is working, you have necessarily already
> configured your Envoy proxies to use TLS for gRPC when bootstrapping Envoy
> via [`consul connect envoy`](/commands/connect/envoy)
> (such as with the [`-ca-file`](/commands/connect/envoy#ca-file) option
> or `CONSUL_CACERT` environment variable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your pre-1.13 service mesh is working, you have already
configured your Envoy proxies to use TLS for gRPC when bootstrapping Envoy
via [`consul connect envoy`](/commands/connect/envoy)
(such as with the [`-ca-file`](/commands/connect/envoy#ca-file) option
or `CONSUL_CACERT` environment variable).
```
